(DOCSP-21085) Structured streaming (#90)
mongodb/docs-spark-connector: source/structured-streaming.txt

.. _spark-structured-streaming:

=================================
Structured Streaming with MongoDB
=================================

.. default-domain:: mongodb

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

Overview
--------

Spark Structured Streaming is a data stream processing engine you can 
use through the Dataset or DataFrame API. The MongoDB Spark Connector 
lets you stream to and from MongoDB using Spark Structured Streaming.

.. include:: includes/streaming-distinction.rst

To learn more about Structured Streaming, see the 
`Spark Programming Guide
<https://spark.apache.org/docs/latest/structured-streaming-programming-guide.html>`__.

.. _write-structured-stream:

Configuring a Write Stream to MongoDB
-------------------------------------

> Specify ``.writeStream`` configuration settings on your streaming 

Author: I agree, changing to "write stream"

> Dataset or DataFrame.

Author: CheckpointLocation and forceDeleteCheckpointLocation are not required so I removed them from the example

              .format("mongodb") \
              .option("checkpointLocation", "/tmp/checkpoint/") \
              .option("forceDeleteTempCheckpointLocation", "true") \
              .option("spark.mongodb.connection.uri", <mongodb-connection-string>) \
              .outputMode("append")

         For a complete list of methods, see the 
         `pyspark Structured Streaming reference <https://spark.apache.org/docs/latest/api/python/reference/pyspark.ss.html>`__.

     - id: scala
       content: |

.. _read-structured-stream:
.. _continuous-processing:

Configuring a Read Stream from MongoDB
--------------------------------------

Reading a stream from a MongoDB database requires 
*continuous processing*, 
an experimental feature introduced in Spark version 2.3. To learn 
more about continuous processing, see the `Spark documentation <https://spark.apache.org/docs/latest/structured-streaming-programming-guide.html#continuous-processing>`__.

To use continuous processing with the MongoDB Spark Connector, add the 
``.trigger()`` method to the ``.writeStream`` of the streaming 
Dataset or DataFrame that you create from your MongoDB ``.readStream``.

> .. note:: 
> 
>    Reading a stream from MongoDB with continuous processing depends 
>    upon watching :manual:`change streams </changeStreams>` for 
>    real-time updates.
> 
>    To read a stream from MongoDB, you must stream data to MongoDB.

Reviewer: Issue: I can't tell what the purpose of this note is. If it is saying that you must update data in MongoDB in order to populate your change stream, could that be explicitly stated?

I'm not sure what is meant by "stream data to MongoDB", as I believe a database's change stream can be populated without a streaming engine like Kafka or Spark Structured Streaming (I believe you can update data through standard CRUD operations to populate the change stream).

```suggestion
.. note:: 

   Your connector populates it's read stream from your MongoDB 
   deployment's change stream. To populate your change stream, perform
   update operations on your MongoDB database.
   
   To learn more about change streams, see :manual:`Change Streams </changeStreams>`
   in the MongoDB manual.
```

Author: >  If it is saying that you must update data in MongoDB in order to populate your change stream, could that be explicitly stated?

Yes that's it, I'll clarify

Specify ``.readStream`` configuration settings on your local 
SparkSession.

.. tabs-drivers::

   tabs:
     - id: java-sync
       content: |

     - id: python
       content: |

         .. code-block:: python
            :copyable: true
            :emphasize-lines: 9
         
            streamingDataFrame = (<local SparkSession>
              .readStream
              .format("mongodb")
              .load()
            )
         
            query = (streamingDataFrame
              .writeStream
              .trigger(continuous="1 second")

>               .queryName("exampleQuery")

Author: Ah, I'll clarify that - it's just the name of this write stream query. There's a method you can use to see the name of a running query, and if you output to memory the queryName will be the name of the table. It doesn't affect the streaming data.

              .format("memory")
              .outputMode("append")
            )

            query.start()

         For a complete list of methods, see the 
         `pyspark Structured Streaming reference <https://spark.apache.org/docs/latest/api/python/reference/pyspark.ss.html>`__.

     - id: scala
       content: |

Examples
--------

Stream to MongoDB from a CSV File
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. tabs-drivers::

   tabs:
     - id: java-sync
       content: |

         .. code-block:: java
            :copyable: true

     - id: python
       content: |

         To create a :ref:`write stream <write-structured-stream>` to 
         MongoDB from a ``.csv`` file, first create a `DataStreamReader <https://spark.apache.org/docs/latest/api/python/reference/api/pyspark.sql.streaming.DataStreamReader.html>`__ 

>          from the ``.csv`` file, then use that DataStreamReader to 

Reviewer: Issue: I believe that as this is a class name it should be monospace

```suggestion
         from the ``.csv`` file, then use that ``DataStreamReader`` to 
```

         create a `DataStreamWriter <https://spark.apache.org/docs/latest/api/python/reference/api/pyspark.sql.streaming.DataStreamWriter.html>`__ 

>          to MongoDB. Finally, ``.start()`` the stream.

Reviewer: Issue: Could the type of the `.start()` method be explicitly stated? I believe this applies to the example below as well.

```suggestion
         to MongoDB. Finally,  use the ``.start()`` method to begin the stream.
```

              .option("spark.mongodb.connection.uri", <mongodb-connection-string>)
              .option('spark.mongodb.database', <database-name>)
              .option('spark.mongodb.collection', <collection-name>)
              .outputMode("append")
            )

            # run the query
            query.start()
            
     - id: scala
       content: |

         .. code-block:: scala
            :copyable: true

Stream to a CSV File from MongoDB
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. tip:: Streaming via change streams

   Streaming from MongoDB requires 
   :ref:`continuous processing <continuous-processing>` 
   and an incoming stream of data to write out.

   Once your stream is running, try adding data to MongoDB and 
   observing your output ``.csv``.

.. tabs-drivers::

   tabs:
     - id: java-sync
       content: |

         .. code-block:: java
            :copyable: true

     - id: python
       content: |

         To create a :ref:`read stream <read-structured-stream>` to a 
         ``.csv`` file from MongoDB, first create a `DataStreamReader <https://spark.apache.org/docs/latest/api/python/reference/api/pyspark.sql.streaming.DataStreamReader.html>`__ 

>          from MongoDB, then use that DataStreamReader to 

Reviewer: Issue: Monospace classname

```suggestion
         from MongoDB, then use that ``DataStreamReader`` to 
```

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

Overview
--------

Spark Structured Streaming is a data stream processing engine you can 
use through the Dataset or DataFrame API. The MongoDB Spark Connector 
enables you to stream to and from MongoDB using Spark Structured 
Streaming.

.. include:: includes/streaming-distinction.rst

To learn more about Structured Streaming, see the 
`Spark Programming Guide
<https://spark.apache.org/docs/latest/structured-streaming-programming-guide.html>`__.

.. _write-structured-stream:

Configuring a Write Stream to MongoDB
-------------------------------------

.. tabs-drivers::

   tabs:
     - id: java-sync
       content: |

     - id: python
       content: |

         Specify write stream configuration settings on your streaming 
         Dataset or DataFrame using the ``writeStream`` property. You 
         must specify the following configuration settings to write 
         to MongoDB:
         
         .. list-table::
            :header-rows: 1
            :stub-columns: 1
            :widths: 10 40
         
            * - Setting
              - Description
         

>             * - ``.writeStream.format()``

Author: removed throughout

              - The format to use for write stream data. Use 
                ``mongodb``.
         
            * - ``.writeStream.option()``
              - Use the ``option`` method to specify your MongoDB 
                deployment connection string with the ``spark.mongodb.
                connection.uri`` option key.
         
                You must specify a database and collection, either as 
                part of your connection string or with additional 
                ``option`` methods using the following keys:
         
                - ``spark.mongodb.database``
                - ``spark.mongodb.collection``
         
            * - ``.writeStream.outputMode()``
              - The output mode to use. To view a list of all supported 
                output modes, see `the pyspark outputMode documentation <https://spark.apache.org/docs/latest/api/python/reference/api/pyspark.sql.streaming.DataStreamWriter.outputMode.html#pyspark.sql.streaming.DataStreamWriter.outputMode>`__.

> 

Author: applied to both

.. _spark-structured-streaming:

=================================
Structured Streaming with MongoDB
=================================

.. default-domain:: mongodb

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

Overview
--------

Spark Structured Streaming is a data stream processing engine you can 
use through the Dataset or DataFrame API. The MongoDB Spark Connector 
enables you to stream to and from MongoDB using Spark Structured 
Streaming.

.. include:: includes/streaming-distinction.rst

To learn more about Structured Streaming, see the 
`Spark Programming Guide
<https://spark.apache.org/docs/latest/structured-streaming-programming-guide.html>`__.

.. _write-structured-stream:

Configuring a Write Stream to MongoDB
-------------------------------------

Specify write stream configuration settings on your streaming 

> Dataset or DataFrame with ``.writeStream``.

Author: Removing the dot convention you pointed out throughout - while I was writing I felt that it made the examples clearer, but it is an unusual way to reference properties.

``.writeStream`` changed to either

- ``writeStream`` property, or
-  "write stream" 
 
throughout. Same for ``.readStream``.

You must specify the following configuration settings to write to 
MongoDB:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :stub-columns: 1
   :widths: 10 40

   * - Setting
     - Description

   * - ``.writeStream.format()``
     - The format to use for write stream data. Use "mongodb".

   * - ``.writeStream.option()``

>      - Use the ``.option`` method to specify your MongoDB deployment 

Reviewer: Question: I'm not sure the name of the method should be prepended with a `.`. Is this correct?

```suggestion
     - Use the ``option`` method to specify your MongoDB deployment 
```

Author: I think you're right in this context

       connection string with the "spark.mongodb.connection.uri" 
       option key.

       You must specify a database and collection, either as part of 
       your connection string or with additional ``.option`` 
       methods using the following keys:

       - "spark.mongodb.database"
       - "spark.mongodb.collection"

   * - ``.writeStream.outputMode()``

>      - The output mode to use.

Reviewer: Suggestion: Could a link be provided to somewhere where I could see what output modes I can choose from?

```suggestion
     - The output mode to use. To view a list of all supported output modes, see `<some link>`__.
```

Author: This comment made me realize I need to move a lot of this into a dedicated python tab - anywhere I link to pyspark docs or reference pyspark methods should be under a tab.

Updated.

.. tabs-drivers::

   tabs:
     - id: java-sync
       content: |

     - id: python
       content: |

         .. code-block:: python
            :copyable: true
            :emphasize-lines: 3-4, 7
         
            <streaming Dataset/ DataFrame> \
              .writeStream \
              .format("mongodb") \
              .option("spark.mongodb.connection.uri", <mongodb-connection-string>) \
              .option("spark.mongodb.database", <database-name>) \
              .option("spark.mongodb.collection", <collection-name>) \
              .outputMode("append")

>          For a complete list of methods, see the 

Reviewer: Issue: Earlier in the section, these were referred to as "settings" but it seems here they are referred to as "methods". Could the terminology be standardized? Applies to read stream section as well.

```suggestion
         For a complete list of settings, see the API documentation for the `DataStreamReader <https://spark.apache.org/docs/latest/api/python/reference/pyspark.ss.html>`__ class. 
```

Author: Standardizing to "setting"

         `pyspark Structured Streaming reference <https://spark.apache.org/docs/latest/api/python/reference/pyspark.ss.html>`__.

     - id: scala
       content: |

.. _read-structured-stream:
.. _continuous-processing:

Configuring a Read Stream from MongoDB
--------------------------------------

Reading a stream from a MongoDB database requires 
*continuous processing*, 
an experimental feature introduced in Spark version 2.3. To learn 
more about continuous processing, see the `Spark documentation <https://spark.apache.org/docs/latest/structured-streaming-programming-guide.html#continuous-processing>`__.

To use continuous processing with the MongoDB Spark Connector, add the 

> ``.trigger()`` method to the ``.writeStream`` of the streaming 
> Dataset or DataFrame that you create from your MongoDB ``.readStream``. 

Reviewer: Issue: could the type of the ``writeStream`` be stated?
Suggestion: Could [this accepted suggestion](https://github.com/mongodb/docs-spark-connector/pull/90#discussion_r836840275) also be applied to the `readStream` here?

```suggestion
``.trigger()`` method to the ``writeStream`` property of the streaming 
Dataset or DataFrame that you create from your MongoDB read stream. 
```

Author: Done

In your ``.trigger()``, specify the ``continuous`` parameter.

.. note:: 

   The connector populates its read stream from your MongoDB 
   deployment's change stream. To populate your change stream, perform 
   update operations on your database.

   To learn more about change streams, see 
   :manual:`Change Streams </changeStreams>` in the MongoDB manual.

> Specify read stream configuration settings on your local 
> SparkSession ``.readStream``. Lastly, add ``.load()`` to create a read 
> stream with your configuration.
> 
> .. note:: 
>    
>    Spark does not begin streaming until you call the ``.start()`` 
>    method on a streaming query.
> 
> You must specify the following configuration settings to read from 
> MongoDB:

Reviewer: Suggestion: I think the note can be moved after the code snippet. This places the note closer to where `start` is called and doesn't break up these two connected sentences.

Suggestion: I think the sentence about `load` can be deleted or moved into the note about start as it is a Spark specific method that (AFAICT) is not unique to MongoDB.

```suggestion
Specify read stream configuration settings on your local 
SparkSession ``readStream`` property. You must specify the
following configuration settings to read from MongoDB:
```

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :stub-columns: 1
   :widths: 10 40

   * - Setting
     - Description

   * - ``.readStream.format()``

>      - The format to use for read stream data. Use "mongodb".

Reviewer: Issue: monospace

```suggestion
     - The format to use for read stream data. Use ``"mongodb"``.
```

   * - ``.writeStream.trigger()``
     - Enables continuous processing for your ``.readStream``. Use 
       the ``continuous`` parameter.

.. tabs-drivers::

   tabs:
     - id: java-sync
       content: |

     - id: python
       content: |

         .. code-block:: python
            :copyable: true
            :emphasize-lines: 3, 9
         
            streamingDataFrame = (<local SparkSession>
              .readStream
              .format("mongodb")
              .load()
            )
         
            query = (streamingDataFrame
              .writeStream
              .trigger(continuous="1 second")
              .format("memory")
              .outputMode("append")
            )

            query.start()

         For a complete list of methods, see the 
         `pyspark Structured Streaming reference <https://spark.apache.org/docs/latest/api/python/reference/pyspark.ss.html>`__.

     - id: scala
       content: |

Examples
--------

The following examples show Spark Structured Streaming configurations 

> for streaming between MongoDB and a CSV file.

Reviewer: Issue: I think csv is formatted like this elsewhere on the page. No preference which way this is formatted, only issue for me is consistency.

```suggestion
for streaming between MongoDB and a `.csv` file.
```

Author: Good catch

Stream to MongoDB from a CSV File
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. tabs-drivers::

   tabs:
     - id: java-sync
       content: |

         .. code-block:: java
            :copyable: true

     - id: python
       content: |

>          To create a :ref:`write stream <write-structured-stream>` to 
>          MongoDB from a ``.csv`` file, first create a `DataStreamReader <https://spark.apache.org/docs/latest/api/python/reference/api/pyspark.sql.streaming.DataStreamReader.html>`__ 
>          from the ``.csv`` file, then use that ``DataStreamReader`` to 
>          create a `DataStreamWriter <https://spark.apache.org/docs/latest/api/python/reference/api/pyspark.sql.streaming.DataStreamWriter.html>`__ 
>          to MongoDB. Finally, use the ``.start()`` method to begin the 
>          stream.
>          
>          As streaming data is read from the ``.csv`` file, it is added 
>          to MongoDB in the `outputMode <https://spark.apache.org/docs/latest/api/python/reference/api/pyspark.sql.streaming.DataStreamWriter.outputMode.html#pyspark.sql.streaming.DataStreamWriter.outputMode>`__ 
>          you specify.

Reviewer: Suggestion: I'm not sure the provided description adds value to the code snippet outside of presenting the links. I think the paragraph largely duplicates the content of the code. Consider moving the links to after the code snippet and simplifying the introduction.

If accepted, this also applies to the following example.

```suggestion
        The following code snippet demonstrates how to stream data from a `.csv` file to MongoDB:
        
        <code snippet>
        
        For more information on the classes used in the preceding code, see the following resources:
        
        - <list of API documentation links>
```

Reviewer: I'm not opposed to hand-holding (I think the more help we can give the better), what I think could be improved about the existing text is that the density of class names and links makes it hard to understand. In addition, `DataStream[Reader/Writer]` were not discussed earlier on the page, so this paragraph introduces new terms which a reader may not need to understand to understand what the code is doing.

I think the text obfuscates the task the code is accomplishing ("write data from MongoDB to a CSV" becomes "create a DataStreamReader to create a DataStreamWriter to MongoDB") rather than clarifies it.

I think focusing on "what the code is doing" rather than "what programming constructs the code is using" will help readers better find the answers to their questions.

If you disagree with this assessment, an alternative way to break this up could be to organize this paragraph as an ordered list which discusses the tasks done be the code sequentially (however I feel this still contains the issue of discussing classes which a reader does not need to be made aware of to achieve their goal).

         .. code-block:: python
            :copyable: true
            :emphasize-lines: 18, 24

            # create a local SparkSession
            spark = SparkSession \
              .builder \
              .appName("writeExample") \
              .master("spark://spark-master:<port>") \
              .config("spark.jars", "<mongodb-spark-connector-{+current-version+}>.jar") \
              .getOrCreate()
 

>             # define the schema of the .csv
>             readSchema = (StructType()
>               .add('Type', StringType())
>               .add('Date', TimestampType())
>               .add('Price', DoubleType())
>             )
> 
>             # define a streaming query
>             query = (spark
>               .readStream
>               .format("csv")
>               .option("header", "true")
>               .schema(readSchema)
>               .load("daily*.csv")
>               # manipulate your streaming data

Reviewer: Issue: As this no longer corresponds to any specific CSV file, could the content of the code snippet corresponding the a specific CSV file be removed? If accepted, this also applies to the following example on the page.

```suggestion
            # define the schema of the .csv
            readSchema = (<csv file schema>)

            # define a streaming query
            query = (spark
              .readStream
              .format("csv")
              .option("header", "true")
              .schema(readSchema)
              .load("<file name>.csv")
              # manipulate your streaming data
```

Author: Good call

Author: Simplified a little further to

            query = (spark
              .readStream
              .format("csv")
              .option("header", "true")
              .schema(<csv-schema>)
              .load(<csv-file-name>)
